
-----------------------------------------------------------

Reactive Programming is trending

    Why are people so excited about reactive programming?
    What does it mean to be reactive? 
    Would it be helpful in our projects? 
    Should we learn how to use it?


-----------------------------------------------------------

Meanwhile Java is

    -  is popular with its multi-threading, speed, reliability, and good portability.
    -  but has bad reputation too — 
       it is very hard to write both concurrent
       and simple applications using only the built-in tools
    -  programming requires writing a lot of boilerplate code   

    In other words, 
    Java is powerful and you can create great applications with it,
    but it won't be easy.

    The good news is that there is a way to change that, 
    using the reactive style of programming.


-----------------------------------------------------------

- What reactive programming is
- Reasons to learn and use this style of programming

-----------------------------------------------------------

What is reactive programming?

Reactive programming is 
a paradigm that revolves around the propagation of change. 

In other words, 
if a program propagates all the changes that modify its data to all the interested parties
(users, other programs, components, and subparts), 
then this program can be called reactive.


A simple example of this is Microsoft Excel. 
If you set a number in cell A1 and another number in cell 'B1',
and set cell 'C1' to SUM(A1, B1); 
whenever 'A1' or 'B1' changes, 'C1' will be updated to be their sum.


Let's call this the reactive sum.



What is the difference between assigning a simple variable c 
to be equal to the sum of the a and b variables
and the reactive sum approach?


int a = 4;
int b = 5;
int c = a + b;
System.out.println(c); // 9

a = 6;
System.out.println(c);
// 9 again, but if 'c' was tracking the changes of 'a' and 'b',
// it would've been 6 + 5 = 11


-----------------------------------------------------------

Why should we be reactive?


The easiest way for us to answer this question is 
to think about the requirements 
we have while building applications these days.


    - today everything should be online 24/7 and 
      should respond with lightning speed; 
    - if it's slow or down, 
      users would prefer an alternative service.
    - Today slow means unusable or broken.
    - We are working with greater volumes of data
      that we need to serve and process fast.


    we have to be fault-tolerant and 
    give our users readable and reasonable message updates.

    In the past, we wrote simple desktop applications,
    but today we write web applications, 
    which should be fast and responsive. 


    These are the new requirements 
    we have to fulfill if we want our software to be competitive. 
    So in other words we have to be:


    Modular/dynamic: 
    -----------------
    This way, we will be able to have 24/7 systems, 
    because modules can go offline and come online without breaking 
    or halting the entire system. 
    Additionally, 
    this helps us better structure our applications 
    as they grow larger and manage their code base.

    Scalable: 
    ----------
    This way, we are going to be able to handle
    a huge amount of data
    or large numbers of user requests.

    Fault-tolerant:
    -----------------
    This way, the system will appear stable to its users.

    Responsive:
    ------------
    This means fast and available.





    Let's think about how to accomplish this:

    We can become modular if our system is event-driven.
    We can divide the system into multiple
    micro-services/components/modules
    that are going to communicate with each other using notifications.
    This way, 
    we are going to react to the data flow of the system,
    represented by notifications.

    To be scalable means 
    to react to the ever-growing data, 
    to react to load without falling apart.

    Reacting to failures/errors 
    will make the system more fault-tolerant.

    To be responsive means 
    reacting to user activity in a timely manner.




    If the application is event-driven, 
    it can be decoupled into multiple self-contained components.
    This helps us become more scalable, 
    because we can always add new components 
    or remove old ones without stopping or breaking the system.

    If errors and failures are passed to the right component,
    which can handle them as notifications,
    the application can become more fault-tolerant or resilient. 
    
    So if we build our system to be event-driven, 
    we can more easily achieve scalability and failure tolerance,
    and a scalable, decoupled, and error-proof application 
    is fast and responsive to users.


    Reactive Manifesto (http://www.reactivemanifesto.org/)


    Changes in the application data can be modeled with notifications,
    which can be propagated to the right handlers. 
    So, writing applications 
    using reactive programming is the easiest way 
    to comply with the Manifesto.



    ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    What is Functional Programming

    - FP is a totally different way to think about writing and structuring code
    - Up untill now, almost we have seen and has been imperative
    - Imperative programming is a bit like the recipe for a cake -
      do this, if this happens do something else and finally do another thing
    - FP is a different approach, and a different paradigm tp writing code


  FP 
   - "a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs -
     that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and
     avoids changing-state and mutable data
     It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done
     with expressions or declarations instead of statements"


     -> A sequence of mathematical functions,the evaluation of functions against a data set
     -> Avoid changing state and mutating data, once assigned a value to variable, we do not change it
     -> it is declarative, we program by saying what we want to do rather than how to do it

        Think about differences between

         SQL ( select * from ..)  vs  x=x*40




    FP - history

    - FP stems from Lambda Calculus,a system developed on the 1930's 
      to express computation as functions

    - Initial this started out as a purely academic concept, before bleeting into commercial programming languages like Ruby,Python ad javaScript

    - As we will see, a language dosen't have to exlusively functional, it may be combine elements of imperative and functional programming
  
    - Java, combines several paradigms including OOP,imperative and functional , now Reactive also



   An Example


      - we have a list of numbers stored in an array
      - in order to use this list of numbers in out application, we need to remove all elements that are not even


     An Imperative style

     - we will create a new array to hold our even numbers
     - we alo need to find out how long our array is
     - Next, we need to create iterator
     - Then we need to loop over each element in the array from 0 to length-1, and read each element
     - For each element we must test of the element is even
     - If it is, we copy it to the new array, if not we skip it
       
    An Functional style

     - defint test function, to Lib



    FP

        - more readable
        - readable code makes debugging and testing easier, and in turn simplify maintenance
        - declarative approach just like SQL, where we define the output data set, rather than the steps required to get it
        - resulting in much cleaner code 


        
        ? Imagine you are moving data from one system to another with lots of transformation and processing, aka ETL
        
        Do you think it would be easier to do this imperatively or functionally ?

        Which approach do you think would be easier to parallelize across multople cores or even multiple servers

        Which pradigm do you think is more expressive for data processing and transformation?
        





